#  news ENTSO-E, Europacable, DSO Entity and T&D Europe publish Joint Roadmap for Future Proof Grids, Call for Regulatory Support in Specific Areas
2 June 2025
_Copenhagen, 2 June 2025 – ENTSO-E, Europacable, EU DSO Entity and T &D Europe today jointly publish a roadmap for a stronger and more coordinated electricity grid supply chain. The roadmap outlines recent progress made, further concrete actions and calls upon policymakers to back this industry momentum with decisive regulatory support in the revision of the public procurement directives._
In November 2023, the EU Grid Action Plan (Action 13) specifically called for joint cooperation aiming at working to develop common technology specifications and improve visibility of grid project pipelines, to facilitate investments in manufacturing capacity and secure supply chains. Today at the Energy Infrastructure Forum, the four associations presented a joint roadmap elaborated in this context.
Europe’s transition to a decarbonised energy system depends on the rapid deployment of modern, robust grid infrastructure. In response to the European Commission’s call for closer cooperation across the grid ecosystem to overcome technical, industrial, and regulatory barriers, the four associations have worked in close partnership since late 2023. The result is a structured, practical course of action, reflected in this shared roadmap.
The roadmap focuses on increasing visibility on equipment and system needs on all voltage levels, asset testing and qualification specifications for HVDC and EHVAC cable systems. It also aims to harmonise templates for HVDC project high level specifications joint assessment and outline priority areas of a common perspective to reform EU’s public procurement directives. Building on the joint public webinar, the associations will also continue raising the importance of skilled workforce.
Europe’s TSOs already project over €800 billion in investments by 2050 for interconnectors and internal projects that are added, upgraded or renewed. ENTSO-E’s latest TYNDP2024 shows that every Euro invested in interconnection capacity gives two Euros in reduced system costs. In response, manufacturers are already scaling up: Europacable members have committed over €4 billion to expand cable production. T&D Europe members have publicly committed more than €9 billion to expanding global manufacturing capacity, over the past 12 months.
The four organisations now call upon policymakers to match industry momentum with decisive regulatory support. A modernised public procurement framework is urgently needed to foster innovation, accelerate deployment, and safeguard Europe’s strategic autonomy. At the same time, targeted investment in skills development is vital to prevent bottlenecks and secure Europe’s continued technological leadership. We welcome support for a Net Zero Industry Academy for the Electricity Grid Sector.
This initiative marks an important level of coordination across Europe’s electricity value chain – from grid operators to manufacturers. It demonstrates how collective action can remove barriers, accelerate infrastructure buildout, and deliver on Europe’s climate and industrial goals.  
  
**Read the full Roadmap Towards Future-Proof Grids[here.](https://eepublicdownloads.blob.core.windows.net/public-cdn-container/clean-documents/Publications/2025/Joint_Roadmap_Towards_Future_Proof_Grids.pdf)**
  
_Media contacts:_   
 _**ENTSO-E:** media@entsoe.eu_
**_DSO Entity:_** Stefania Facco, Senior Communication Manager (Stefania.facco@eudsoentity.eu)