New Working Arrangements with UK Transmission System Operators
17 July 2025
ENTSO-E has signed new **Working Arrangements (WAs)** with the **UK’s transmission system owners and operators.** This agreement marks a significant step in formalising post-Brexit cooperation between ENTSO-E and the British electricity grid operators and owners. 
The WAs provide a dedicated cooperation platform to address key shared priorities, including **security of electricity infrastructure, expanding clean offshore energy planning** like the North Sea Grid planning, and enhancing the efficient use of **electricity interconnectors** between the UK and continental Europe. 
While UK TSOs are no longer members of ENTSO-E due to Brexit, the WAs provide a pragmatic and forward-looking framework to ensure that strong operational ties and technical dialogue continue. 
Zbynek Boldis, **President of ENTSO-E** , highlighted: 
_“The signing of these Working Arrangements reflects our shared commitment to maintaining a resilient and interconnected European electricity system. This cooperation enables us to respond jointly to the complex challenges of the energy transition, particularly in offshore development, system operations, and interconnector efficiency. We value the strong and constructive partnership with UK TSOs and look forward to deepening our collaboration in the years ahead.”_
Fintan Slye, **Chief Executive Officer, NESO** , said: 
 _“We warmly welcome these new working arrangements between Great Britain and EU energy networks, recognising the importance of collaboration across our various organisations to strengthen energy security and clean power. We look forward to working closely with ENTSO-e in future to represent the views of our colleagues across the UK’s electricity networks sector.”_
As Great Britain’s electricity system operator, NESO will represent all British transmission network operators (TNOs) at coordination meetings with ENTSO-E. The agreement complements the commitments outlined by both governments during the UK-EU Summit in May 2025.
#### About ENTSO-E
ENTSO-E, the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity, is the association for the cooperation of the European transmission system operators (TSOs).  
The [40 member TSOs](https://www.entsoe.eu/about/inside-entsoe/members/), representing 36 countries, are responsible for the secure and coordinated operation of Europe’s electricity system, the largest interconnected electrical grid in the world. In addition to its core, historical role in technical cooperation, ENTSO-E is also the common voice of TSOs.
Press contact: **[media@entsoe.eu](https://www.entsoe.eu/news/2025/07/17/new-working-arrangements-with-uk-transmission-system-operators/media@entsoe.eu)**