#  news ENTSO-E publishes its annual Overview of Transmission Tariffs in Europe for 2022 and 2023
20 June 2025
ENTSO-E’s Overview of Transmission Tariffs in Europe provides an in-depth analysis of the design, structure, and level of transmission tariffs across over 37 European countries. This report offers a comprehensive breakdown of the components constituting transmission tariffs, aiming to provide stakeholders an accessible, comparative overview of the diverse approaches used throughout Europe.
Transmission tariffs remain a fundamental element of the Internal Electricity Market. There is no single “correct solution” for recovering electricity transmission costs—different national methods coexist. Having in mind existing level of diversity between transmission tariff implementation among ENTSO-E member countries, to enable tariff comparability, an artificial “Unit Transmission Tariff” (UTT) is calculated for each participating country based on a standardised “base case.” grid user pattern. However, this overview does not directly compare individual tariffs in place, and any extrapolation and conclusion must take national specificities into account.
The UTT calculation includes charges billed to base case grid users (generation and load) to cover both TSO-related costs (infrastructure, system services, and losses) and, where relevant, non-TSO costs (such as RES and non-RES support schemes, regulatory levies, or stranded costs). ENTSO-E Overview of Transmission Tariffs in Europe is presenting their their absolute value and relative ratio, as well as some specific remarks in relation to the transmission tariff implementation in each participating country.
**R﻿ead the reports below:**
[**2022** Transmission Tariffs Overview](https://eepublicdownloads.blob.core.windows.net/public-cdn-container/clean-documents/mc-documents/transmission-tariffs/Overview_of_Transmission_Tariffs_in_Europe_Synthesis_2022.pdf)
[**2023** Transmission Tariffs Overview](https://eepublicdownloads.blob.core.windows.net/public-cdn-container/clean-documents/mc-documents/transmission-tariffs/Overview_of_Transmission_Tariffs_in_Europe_Synthesis_2023.pdf)