#  news Include your project in the Pan-European Network Development Plan TYNDP 2026 - Submission window open until 26 May
24 April 2025
ENTSO-E invites all interested parties to submit projects of transmission or storage infrastructure for inclusion in the Ten-Year Network Development Plan (TYNDP) 2026. Inclusion in the TYNDP is a precondition for transmission and storage projects to apply to obtain status of European Projects of Common Interest or Project of Mutual Interest. 
ENTSO-E’s TYNDP is the pan-European electricity infrastructure development plan. It links, supports, and complements national grid development plans by providing a wide European vision of the future power system and investigates how power links and storage can be used to make the energy transition happen in a cost-effective and secure way. ENTSO-E will perform a cost-benefit analysis of selected projects against multiple indicators, and will release the results of the assessment in the draft TYNDP 2026 for public consultation in Q3 2026. 
Projects submitted by May 26 will be checked against requirements for inclusion in TYNDP 2026, specified in the [Guidance for applicants – Criteria for applications and their treatment](https://eepublicdownloads.blob.core.windows.net/public-cdn-container/tyndp-documents/TYNDP2026/250331_TYNDP2026_GuidanceforApplicants-For_Publication.pdf). This document, submitted to public consultation in February-March 2025 and released in its final version on 24 April , specifies the procedure and timeline to submit a project, the documents and information required, and the use and circulation of the information submitted. 
Additional documents available to promoters include: 
  * [User guide of the TYNDP projects platform](https://eepublicdownloads.blob.core.windows.net/public-cdn-container/tyndp-documents/TYNDP2026/TYNDP2026_ProjectsPlatform_UserGuide_Draft.pdf): this documents explains how to use the platform and flags a few tips and points for attention when editing or creating a project; 
  * [FAQ for promoters](https://eepublicdownloads.blob.core.windows.net/public-cdn-container/tyndp-documents/TYNDP2026/250207_TYNDP2026_FAQ_ProjectPromoters_Final.pdf): this document will be updated regularly throughout the submission window, and later during the TYNDP process to include all frequent questions from promoters 
  * Promoters are also advised to read the [4th ENTSO-E Guideline for cost-benefit analysis of grid development projects](https://eepublicdownloads.blob.core.windows.net/public-cdn-container/clean-documents/news/2024/entso-e_4th_CBA_Guideline_240409.pdf) for information on specific aspects of the CBA methodology. 


Submission of projects is done through the [TYNDP 2026 projects platform](https://tyndp2026.entsoe.eu/). To receive credentials to access the platform or for any question, please contact our team at tyndp@entsoe.eu. Interested promoters may also join our [webinar](https://events.teams.microsoft.com/event/369d66e8-5434-43fc-9e8d-f9d143c93990@7ffbeccf-0c1b-496c-8978-89209c2d375d) on Tuesday 6 May , where our team will be available to answer questions.