#  news TYNDP 2026 Draft Scenarios Economic Variants Development Methodology – Draft for consultation opens 1 July 2025
2 July 2025
ENTSO-E and ENTSOG invite all interested stakeholders to take part in the public consultation on the Draft 2026 TYNDP Scenarios’ Economic Variants’ methodology. Taking place within the framework of the 2026 TYNDP Scenarios development cycle, the public consultation aims at gathering feedback from key stakeholders to further strengthen the development and later implementation of the upcoming overall TYNDP Scenarios as required by Article 12 of (EU) 2022/869. The public consultation plays a crucial role in achieving a meaningful exchange of findings and continuation of building the right forecasts for Europe’s energy and climate ambitions in the medium and long-term. The consultation will close on 29 July 2025.
_Important note: This is a separate consultation running in parallel to the ongoing public consultation on the input data and other methodologies on the Draft 2026 TYNDP Scenarios, which is open from 16 June until 14 July. ENTSOG and ENTSO-E welcome stakeholders’ input on both consultations, accessible via the[Consultation Hub](https://consultations.entsoe.eu/). Please note the consultations closing dates._
In addition to the consultations, ENTSOG and ENTSO-E will hold a public workshop on 4 July 2025. This public workshop will include a dedicated session for the draft Economic Variants to thoroughly determine its first-time applied methodology. Registration to the public workshop taking place on 4 July is possible [here](https://events.teams.microsoft.com/event/664bc3e7-d122-4b42-9f70-560c8c26ef96@810584fd-69f9-4137-a6a1-c0e33280b15c).
**Who can Participate:**
The consultation intends to convene key stakeholders from across the European Union—including representatives from industry, NGOs, grid operators, regional and local authorities, and policymakers— while ensuring a balanced representation and incorporating diverse perspectives from all parts of the EU.
**What are the Next steps:**
ENTSO-E and ENTSOG will consider the feedback received during the consultation when building the TYNDP 2026 Scenarios’ Economic Variants, which are expected to be published in draft form in Q2 2026. A summary of this public consultation’s feedback, , and how such feedback was considered, will be published.
**Related links:**
The public consultation is available [here](https://consultations.entsoe.eu/tyndp/scenarios-economic-variants/).
  
More information on the TYNDP 2026 Scenarios, including the Innovation Roadmap and stakeholder engagement activities, can be found on the ENTSOs’ joint [TYNDP 2026 Scenarios website](https://2026.entsos-tyndp-scenarios.eu/#introduction).