#  news ENTSO-E Expert Panel continues collection of data and identifies next steps on Iberian Peninsula blackout investigation
6 June 2025
Following its second meeting on 3 June, the Expert Panel established to investigate the 28 April blackout in the Iberian Peninsula has identified the next steps to guide its ongoing investigation.
The Panel is currently collecting all the data needed to establish the facts related to the incident. This data will help understand, among other things, the oscillation phenomena which occurred before the blackout. The investigation is focusing on a number of questions, including on determining what triggered the initial generation trips in Southern Spain, and why the Spanish and Portuguese System Defence Plans were unable to halt the process that led to the full blackout of both countries.
Furthermore, ENTSO-E is launching today a dedicated [webpage](https://www.entsoe.eu/publications/blackout/9-may-2025-iberian-blackout/)that will serve as an information portal for stakeholders throughout the investigation. It provides a preliminary sequence of events from the day of the blackout as well as information on the restoration process, the composition of the Expert Panel, and other relevant aspects. The webpage will be updated as the investigation progresses, and new information becomes available. The information published is based on preliminary findings and analysis and may change at any time.
The Expert Panel consists of experts from TSOs and Regional Coordination Centers, and representatives from the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER) and National Regulatory Authorities (NRAs). The Panel held its first meeting on 12 May and will meet every three weeks until the publication of the final report.
**To access the webpage click[here](https://www.entsoe.eu/publications/blackout/9-may-2025-iberian-blackout/).**
**For media inquiries, please contact: media@entsoe.eu**
❗**Disclaimer** ❗
The documents and materials published on this website by ENTSO-E are considered working documents and are provided for general informational purposes only. These documents are based on the most current information available to ENTSO-E at the time of publication. Thus, the information contained herein may be updated, modified, or replaced as new data becomes available or circumstances change.
ENTSO-E makes no representations or warranties, express or implied, as to the completeness, accuracy, reliability, or suitability of the information contained in these documents. Users are encouraged to verify the information independently and consult directly with ENTSO-E for the most recent and authoritative updates.
By using this website, you acknowledge and accept that the content may be revised at any time without prior notice, and ENTSO-E shall not be held liable for any loss or damage arising from the use or reliance on the information provided.
**About ENTSO-E:**
ENTSO-E, the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity, is the association for the cooperation of the European transmission system operators (TSOs). The 40 member TSOs, representing 36 countries, are responsible for the secure and coordinated operation of Europe’s electricity system, the largest interconnected electrical grid in the world. In addition to its core, historical role in technical cooperation, ENTSO-E is also the common voice of TSOs.