#  news New Ten-Year Network Development Plan highlights power transmission and storage needs to meet the Energy Transition targets
31 January 2025
ENTSO-E’s draft TYNDP shows the strategic electricity infrastructure investments that ensure that Europe’s energy system can meet the EU’s and Member States energy and climate targets for 2030, 2040, and 2050 while providing a positive impact on system costs.
In line with the TEN-E Regulation, the new TYNDP outlines the further investments in the European electricity system that would reduce total system costs. The report outlines that by 2040, 108 GW of additional cross-border capacity would be beneficial to meet this goal. Each euro invested in electricity infrastructure will translate into over two euros saved in system costs. By 2050, an additional 224 GW of cross-border transmission grid capacity and 540 GW of storage capacity would be economically efficient. These investments are essential to support the energy transition to a low-carbon energy system that reinforces Europe security and competitiveness.
The report also identifies key challenges, including lengthy permitting processes and the need for resilient and efficient supply chains to meet the rising demand for grid technologies. Overcoming these challenges will require a concerted effort from all stakeholders to ensure the timely delivery of critical infrastructure projects.
The TYNDP demonstrates how the energy transition needs not only more cross-border interconnections, but also ramp-up development of national grids which will need significant reinforcements. TYNDP 2024 includes an analysis of how 178 transmission projects and 33 storage projects would contribute to advancing the energy transition.
It builds on a set of robust multi-energy scenarios that were published early 2024 and have been formally approved by the European Commission. Scenarios build on a thorough stakeholder engagement process, including the new Stakeholders Reference Group active since end 2023 which involves 25 stakeholders across the energy sector.
The TYNDP is now open for [public consultation](https://consultations.entsoe.eu/system-development/tyndp-2024/), enabling stakeholders to provide their feedback until 14 March 2025. The final report will be submitted to ACER, the European Commission and Member States for opinion. A public workshop will be organised on 27 March 2025.
For more information and to access the draft TYNDP 2024 reports, visualisations and all data packages, please visit [our webpage.](https://tyndp.entsoe.eu/)
**About ENTSO-E**
ENTSO-E, the European Network of Transmission System Operators for Electricity, is the association for the cooperation of the European transmission system operators (TSOs). The 40 member TSOs, representing 36 countries, are responsible for the secure and coordinated operation of Europe’s electricity system, the largest interconnected electrical grid in the world. In addition to its core, historical role in technical cooperation, ENTSO-E is also the common voice of TSOs. [](https://consultations.entsoe.eu/system-development/tyndp-2024/)
Contact: [media@entsoe.eu](https://www.entsoe.eu/news/2025/01/31/new-ten-year-network-development-plan-highlights-power-transmission-and-storage-needs-to-meet-the-energy-transition-targets/media@entsoe.eu)