#  news Public Consultation - Proposal for Amendment of RCC Procurement Proposal is now open
7 July 2025
On 2 July, the SORs (TSOs and RCCs) launched a [public consultation](https://consultations.entsoe.eu/markets/amendment-of-rcc-procurement-proposal/) on the Proposal for Amendment of RCC Procurement Proposal. The objective of the public consultation is to collect the stakeholders’ views. After the public consultation, ENTSO-E and SORs will assess the comments received from the stakeholders, finalise the amendment proposal and submit it to ACER by 15 October 2025.
**Background**
On 19 July 2023, ACER published its [Decision No 13/2023 ](https://www.acer.europa.eu/sites/default/files/documents/Individual%20Decisions/ACER_Decision_13-2023_on_RCC_Regional_Procurement_of_Balancing_Capacity_Methodology.pdf)regarding the proposal for regional procurement of balancing capacity in accordance with Article 37(1)(k) of Regulation (EU) 2019/943, where ACER stated (Article 3(7)), that to apply the methodology in the SOR, the relevant TSOs, supported by relevant RCC(s), shall determine in a coordinated manner the parameters referred to in this methodology.
Following the TSOs and RCCs coordination, ENTSO-E developed an amendment to this methodology in accordance with Article 27 of the Electricity Regulation, proposing the parameters’ values included in an Annex. This amended proposal includes the levels X and Y referred to in Article 4 of the RCC Procurement Methodology. The proposal has been prepared by SORs and ENTSO-E.
Given that the proposed scope of changes is minimal, fully harmonised, and clearly explained in the accompanying documentation, we do not believe an additional public webinar would add substantial value at this stage. However, should you have any questions, please refer to the contact details provided.