#  news Litgrid joined the European balancing energy exchange platform PICASSO
5 March 2025
**Lithuanian electricity transmission system operator Litgrid has successfully accessed the pan-European Platform for the International Coordination of Automatic Frequency Restoration Reserves and Stable System Operation (PICASSO). Litgrid became the 13th electricity transmission system operator (TSO) to join the platform which enhances economic and technical efficiency integrating the European balancing markets and ensuring system security.**
“After successfully carrying out the Baltic synchronisation with Continental Europe we are further improving market integration with our European partners. This is the next step enabling the Baltic balancing market after joining the MARI platform last year and the launch of Baltic balancing capacity market this February,” says Donatas Matelionis, Head of Power System Operations Department at Litgrid.
Initially, only the imbalance netting with other transmissions system operators via the International Grid Control Cooperation will be available through LitPol Link interconnection, with the cross-border aFRR exchange starting as Estonian and Latvian TSOs access PICASSO later this year.
Litgrid will start procurement of aFRR capacity in the Baltic balancing capacity market together with AST and Elering on April 15 for the 24 hour-period of April 16.
The imbalance netting is the optimization of aFRR activations avoiding activation in opposite directions. In this way, the system balance is maintained preserving available aFRR reserves which could be used to manage further imbalances or disturbances in the system.
Balancing services can be provided using a variety of technologies, including energy storage batteries, solar and wind farms, flexible consumption. In the balancing energy market, participants can offer to reduce or increase their generation or consumption capacity immediately, so that the TSO can ensure a continuous balance between generation and consumption.
On February 8 this year, the Baltic countries disconnected from the Russian-controlled IPS/UPS electricity system, and on February 9 they successfully connected their electricity systems to the Continental European Synchronous Area. Synchronisation allows the Baltic countries to manage their electricity systems in close cooperation with other Continental European countries, ensuring stable and reliable frequency regulation, thus strengthening energy independence and increasing energy security throughout the region. The Baltic countries have joined the Continental European grid, which serves more than 400 million consumers in 26 countries.