#  news TSOs launch new process to calculate net transfer capacity at the borders of Ukraine and Moldova
18 June 2025
ENTSO-E congratulates the Transmission System Operators (TSOs) of Hungary, Moldova, Poland, Romania, Slovakia and Ukraine for concluding an agreement for the determination of the commercial exchange capacity that can be offered at the borders between the Ukraine-Moldova control block and the neighbouring EU TSOs. This agreement marks an important milestone in the operationalisation of the Eastern Europe Capacity Calculation Region (EE CCR).
Shortly after the emergency synchronisation of the power systems of Ukraine and Moldova with the Continental Europe Synchronous Area on 16 March 2022, the TSOs of the ENTSO-E Regional Group Continental Europe (RGCE) developed processes allowing market parties to import and export electricity between Ukraine-Moldova and the neighbouring EU countries. Since then, the RGCE has gradually increased the commercial exchange capacity limits which currently amount to 1 700 MW from the EU to the Ukraine-Moldova control block and 650 MW in the other direction.
This recent agreement among the TSOs in the region foresees that every month, the Regional Coordination Centre TSCNET will calculate the net transfer capacity that can be offered on the borders for each week of the upcoming month, respecting the agreed capacity allocation procedure. This new process will first be applied for the determination of the net transfer capacity for the month of July. This new process will first be applied for the determination of the net transfer capacity for July 2025.
During their meeting on 17 June 2025, the RGCE TSOs welcomed this development and formally decided to hand over to the TSOs in the region the responsibility to determine the commercial exchange capacity limits between Ukraine-Moldova and the neighbouring EU countries.