# EEX Press Release - EEX expands power derivatives portfolio to facilitate renewables integration
###  12/17/2024  EEX Press Release 
**Leipzig, 17 December 2024** - The European Energy Exchange (EEX) is set to introduce “Mon-Sun Peak Power Futures”, a unique suite of contracts for the Spanish market, in addition to short-term futures for the Greek power market. Both new sets of contracts will be available from 24 February 2025. 
Developed in close coordination with the power trading community, the new “Mon-Sun Peak Futures” address the shift in power spot prices influenced by photovoltaic generation during daytime, regardless of the day of the week. These new contracts cover peak hours from 8:00am to 8:00pm CET, Monday to Sunday, matching the hedging needs over a full week, in line with solar power production. A full range of expiries from Day to Year will be available for these contracts, which will be initially launched for the Spanish market, with the potential to expand to other European markets in due course. 
The new Greek daily and weekly futures with a baseload profile have been designed for hedging volatile short-term positions. They will complement EEX’s offering for the Greek market, which has seen substantial year-on-year monthly growth in volumes over 2024, latest in November (+425%). 
Peter Reitz, CEO of EEX, commented: “ _EEX is committed to facilitating the energy transition by offering market-based tools that support this shift. The new “Mon-Sun Peak Futures” reflect the changing patterns in power spot markets, where solar generation increasingly impacts prices. These contracts provide a hedging opportunity aligned with the continuous nature of solar power generation._ ”
  
To further support renewables integration and provide PPA hedging opportunities, EEX recently extended expiries to ten calendar years for the French and Dutch power markets, in addition to the existing offerings in the German, Spanish, and Italian markets. Long-term deals in the Spanish, Italian, and German power markets have seen significant growth, surpassing 10.5 TWh in traded volume in 2024.
The **European Energy Exchange (EEX)** is a leading energy exchange which builds secure, successful and sustainable commodity markets worldwide – together with its customers. As part of EEX Group, a group of companies serving international commodity markets, it offers contracts on power, natural gas and emission allowances as well as freight and agricultural products. EEX also provides registry services as well as auctions for guarantees of origin, on behalf of the French State. More information: [www.eex.com](http://www.eex.com)
