# EEX Press Release - EEX EU ETS2 futures launched with first-day trade
###  07/08/2025  EEX Press Release 
**Please find below the information on the launch of the EEX EU ETS2 futures with first-day trade.**
**Leipzig, 8 July 2025** - The European Energy Exchange (EEX), in cooperation with IncubEx, has launched the new futures contracts related to the EU Emissions Trading System 2 (EU ETS2), enabling companies to hedge their exposure well ahead of the start of the ETS 2 primary auction. 
The first trade concluded on the first day of availability, between Macquarie and CFP Energy, brokered by Tradition. 
Patrick Rodzki, Vice President within Macquarie’s Commodities and Global Markets business, comments: “ _Macquarie is pleased to have participated in the first trade of EU ETS 2 futures on the European Energy Exchange. This milestone reflects our commitment to supporting clients by using our expertise to help them navigate the EU ETS 2 scheme. With our global experience in environmental markets, we assist clients in managing risks and identifying opportunities within this important sector._ ”
Tim Atkinson, Head of Carbon at CFP Energy, comments: “ _CFP Energy, an award-winning specialist in risk management solutions, is proud to have participated in the first EEX-hosted trade in the new ETS2 carbon market. While still in its early stages, the development of this market is vital — enabling us to support fuel suppliers and end users with robust compliance and risk management strategies under this emerging scheme. This milestone represents a significant step forward for CFP Energy, building on more than 15 years of active involvement and proven expertise in the EU ETS and broader carbon markets._ ”
John Molloy, Head of Environmental Products at Tradition Energy and Commodities, comments: “ _We are delighted to have brokered the first ever ETS2 EEX cleared trade, vintage Dec 2028, and look forward to developing and supporting further opportunities in this trading space._ ”
Alex Lewis, Managing Director at Tradition Energy and Commodities, adds: “ _This supports our commitment in the ongoing development of the Carbon Market and we are pleased to remain at the forefront as it continues to further evolve._ ”
The EU Emissions Trading System 2 (EU ETS2) is expected to become fully operational in January 2027 to include emissions from buildings and road transport as well as additional sectors.
The new contract suite by EEX comprises December and April maturities for the first three years of the new scheme, with the first expiry of December 2027.
The EEX EU ETS2 futures contracts are available through order book trading as well as trade registration.
Please find the press release in German in the document below.
The **[European Energy Exchange (EEX)](https://www.eex.com/en/)** is a leading energy exchange which builds secure, successful and sustainable commodity markets worldwide – together with its customers and partners. As part of EEX Group, it serves international power, natural gas, environmental, freight and agricultural markets, and provides data, reporting and registry services. EEX is an enabler of the energy transition and decarbonisation, advancing renewables integration through dedicated products and services, including those related to guarantees of origin.
**[IncubEx](https://smc-link.s4hana.ondemand.com/eu/data-buffer/sap/public/cuan/link/100/0AFF0E5294F045BAEE2C70A7FD6D889FDC41A15A?_V_=2&_K11_=159343867946CF4333692ED030B1A46AEA34F206&_L54AD1F204_=c2NlbmFyaW89TUxDUEcmdGVuYW50PW15NDAxNTg3LnM0aGFuYS5jbG91ZC5zYXAmdGFyZ2V0PWh0dHBzOi8vdGhlaW5jdWJleC5jb20vP3V0bV9zb3VyY2U9U0FQSHlicmlzJnV0bV9tZWRpdW09ZW1haWwmdXRtX2NhbXBhaWduPTI2ODgmdXRtX3Rlcm09RUVYJTIwUFIlMjBFVSUyMEVUUzIlMjBGaXJzdCUyMERheSUyMFRyYWRlJTIwRU5fX19MaW5rJnV0bV9jb250ZW50PUVO&_K13_=333&_K14_=135803c73e0e7821bdd1fa8c99f1e9c633fc880fac883ed1ff6b79d8c4238795)** works with partners and stakeholders to design and develop new financial products, markets and trading solutions in global environmental, climate risk, and related commodity markets. The company collaborates with the European Energy Exchange (EEX) and its U.S. subsidiary, Nodal Exchange on listed environmental products and operates The Voluntary Climate Marketplace (TVCM). IncubEx, a privately held company founded in 2016 with offices in Chicago and London, is uniquely positioned to capture these opportunities globally.
