# EEX Press Release - EEX launches Biogas Production Certificates Registry in France
###  06/17/2025  EEX Press Release 
The European Energy Exchange (EEX) successfully launched the operation of the new biogas production certificate (CPBs – Certificats de Production de Biogaz) registry in France on Monday, 16 June. This initiative, mandated by the French Ministry in charge of Energy, aims to support the development of biomethane as a renewable energy source within the country.
The CPB scheme, established under the 2021 French Climate and Resilience Act, requires natural gas suppliers to offer their customers a minimum share of biomethane. This is achieved through an obligation to return CPBs to the French state, thereby promoting the integration of renewable gases into the national energy mix.
Aude Filippi, EEX Director Business Development Gas and Sustainability markets, comments: _“We are honoured to operate this registry alongside our operations for the French Ministry, and by this to contribute to the transition towards a more sustainable energy system in France.”_
Natural gas suppliers have the option to obtain CPBs by producing biomethane themselves or by purchasing certificates from biomethane producers. Biomethane is considered an important renewable energy carrier because it serves as a substitute for natural gas, providing energy storage capabilities and supporting decarbonisation efforts.
For more information on the CPB registry and how to get access to it, please visit <https://www.eex.com/en/markets/energy-certificates/french-biogas-production-certificates>.
Please find the press release in French and German in the document below.
The **[European Energy Exchange (EEX)](https://www.eex.com/en/)** is a leading energy exchange which builds secure, successful and sustainable commodity markets worldwide – together with its customers and partners. As part of EEX Group, it serves international power, natural gas, environmental, freight and agricultural markets, and provides data, reporting and registry services. EEX is an enabler of the energy transition and decarbonisation, advancing renewables integration through dedicated products and services, including those related to guarantees of origin.
