* 24 July 2025
  * Directorate-General for Energy
  * 2 min read


# Commission takes action to ensure complete and timely transposition of EU directives - key decisions on energy
The European Commission is taking action against several EU Member States that have failed to notify the Commission of measures they have adopted to transpose EU directives into their national laws. The deadline to transpose these directives has expired recently. The Commission is sending a letter of formal notice to these Member States, giving them 2 months to reply and complete the transposition of the directives. If they fail to do so, the Commission may issue a stronger warning, known as a reasoned opinion. The Member States in question have failed to fully transpose one EU directive related to defence, energy, transport, justice and health. The Commission is urging them to take immediate action to bring their laws in line with EU requirements.
## Commission calls on Member States to transpose the reinforced rules to promote renewable energy
The European Commission decided to open infringement procedures by sending letters of formal notice to 26 Member States (Belgium, Bulgaria, Czechia, Germany, Estonia, Ireland, Greece, Spain, France, Croatia, Italy, Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Hungary, Malta, the Netherlands, Austria, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia, Finland and Sweden) for failing to communicate to the European Commission the full transposition of the provisions of the [amending Directive (EU) 2023/2413 ](https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=OJ:L_202302413) into national law. The Directive was adopted in 2023. Member States had to notify the transposition of the Directive by 21 May 2025, except for some provisions related to permitting, which were already due by 1 July 2024. The new rules aim to accelerate the deployment of renewable energy in all sectors of the economy, not only in the power sector, but also and especially in those sectors where progress is more difficult like heating and cooling, buildings, transport and industry, where we have also set new or strengthened targets. They set important horizontal and cross-cutting measures to promote the deployment of renewables, such as the strengthening of guarantees of origin, facilitating energy system integration through the promotion of electrification and renewable hydrogen, and safeguards to ensure a more sustainable bioenergy production. The implementation of the legislation is instrumental to accelerate the roll-out of homegrown clean energy, to further reduce GHG emissions in the energy sector - which currently contributes over 75% of total GHG emissions in the Union-, and to strengthen energy security. It will also contribute to lowering energy prices and enhancing the competitiveness of the EU economy. To date, only Denmark notified full transposition of the Directive by the legal deadline. The Commission is therefore sending letters of formal notice to 26 Member States. They now have two months to respond, complete their transposition and notify their measures to the Commission. In the absence of a satisfactory response, the Commission may decide to issue a reasoned opinion.
For more information, see the full [press release](https://ec.europa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/inf_25_1842). 
## Details 

Publication date
    
24 July 2025 

Author
    [Directorate-General for Energy](https://commission.europa.eu/about/departments-and-executive-agencies/energy_en)