* 11 July 2025
  * Directorate-General for Energy
  * 1 min read


# Executive Vice-President Ribera and Commissioners Hoekstra, Jørgensen and Roswall participate in the EU-China High-Level Climate and Environment & Energy Dialogues 
On 13 and 14 July, Executive Vice-President Ribera and Commissioners Wopke Hoekstra, Dan Jørgensen and Jessika Roswall will be in Beijing to participate in the Sixth EU-China High-Level Environment and Climate Dialogue (HECD). This is the key platform to enhance bilateral cooperation between the EU and China on domestic and international policies. The 12th EU-China Energy Dialogue and the second dedicated EU-China High Level Policy Dialogue on Circular Economy will also take place on this occasion.
On Monday, following opening remarks by the co-chairs Executive Vice-President Ribera and the Chinese Vice-Premier Ding Xuexiang, the HECD will kick off with two policy sessions. The first one, with the participation of Commissioner Hoekstra, will focus on the forthcoming COP30 UN Climate Conference and preparations of the EU’s and China’s nationally determined contributions. They will also discuss ongoing bilateral cooperation on climate policies and exchange views on the progress made on related domestic policies, in particular reducing emissions in the energy sector. In the second policy session, Commissioner Roswall will address common global environmental challenges such as the upcoming negotiations towards a Global Plastics Treaty and preparations for the next COP17 to the Convention on Biodiversity next year. They will also discuss bilateral cooperation on water, circular economy, wildlife protection and pollution. 
Earlier in the day, Commissioner Jørgensen will chair the Energy Dialogue with dedicated discussions on the energy transition. Commissioner Roswall will also chair the High-Level Policy Dialogue on Circular Economy. 
On Sunday, Executive Vice-President Ribera and Commissioner Jessika Roswall will attend policy roundtables with stakeholders on the green transition and the environment. Others bilateral meetings with Chinese government representatives will be held during their stay.