##  Event Recording 
**We need your consent to load this service: YouTube**
By confirming, you consent to the data transfer to the external service YouTube and to the processing of this data. Further information is available in our [Privacy Policy](https://www.agora-industry.org/privacy-policy).
Store my consent on this device.
Accept and load content
Renewable hydrogen has the potential to play a major role in the just transition toward a net-zero economy, both in developed and developing countries. Industrialised economies with high energy needs and limited renewable resource potential will require imported renewable hydrogen and hydrogen-based products to achieve their decarbonisation goals. On the other hand, renewable-rich countries with large potential for green hydrogen development, mostly located in the Global South, view the hydrogen economy as an opportunity to enhance their socio-economic development as well as contribute to global decarbonisation.
Under the umbrella of the International PtX (Power-to-X ) Hub, Agora Energiewende in collaboration with Öko-Institut, has developed the **Business Opportunity Analyser (BOA).** The analyser is an interactive excel tool that aims to promote the export of a range of PtX molecules, such as green ammonia, e-methanol, synthetic fuels and so forth. The tool will enable users to calculate the delivered cost of PtX molecules from an export country to an import country, highlighting the competitive edge of one country against another. This ‘pre-feasibility’ level information will assist in identifying regions with promising business opportunities within the PtX value chain. Such information will also support policymakers in understanding their country's specific PtX cost potentials, thereby assisting in the development of targeted policies to facilitate investment in PtX value chains. The BOA will have a global scope covering most of the potential export and import countries, including a deep dive analysis for Argentina, Morocco and South Africa.
This one hour and 15 miniutes event provided an introduction of the tool, including structure, data and outputs, among other important features of the analyser and included a Q&A session with the audience.
**PRESENTATIONS**  
The presentations can be found in the download section below.
**RECORDING**  
The recording can be found above.