Agora Think Tanks and the Energy Research Institute (ERI) have entered a strategic partnership to jointly accelerate Thailand's transition towards carbon neutrality by 2050 and net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2065. ERI is a non-profit research institute established in 1991 and based at Chulalongkorn University Thailand.
The collaboration covers a wide range of areas, from strategic advisory support for the development of power system transformation policies to skill sharing, trainings, and exchange of visiting scholars. The two parties officially cemented their commitment by signing a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on 24 April 2024 in Bangkok, Thailand.
“Achieving net zero globally by around mid-century will depend on the decisions made today,” said Markus Steigenberger, Managing Director of Agora Think Tanks. “Southeast Asia has huge potential to develop renewable energy such as solar and wind power. Unlocking this potential is critical not only to achieve climate goals but to build a resilient and affordable power system. We look forward to working with the ERI to help speed up the clean energy transition in Thailand and beyond.”
“ERI will leverage its academic research and expertise to support the development and implementation of effective energy transition strategies in Thailand. We will work together with Agora to share best practices and lessons learned from various stakeholders, including government agencies, the private sector, and international partners.” Prof. Viboon Sricharoenchaikul, ERI Deputy Director.
Agora Think Tanks develops feasible and science-based policy proposals to advance climate neutrality in Germany, Europe, and internationally. Its dedicated Southeast Asia team works with partners in the region to accelerate a just and equitable energy transition in line with net-zero commitments. It does so by conducting in-depth analyses on the key topics linked to the energy transition and facilitating knowledge sharing and discussion.